Time and Space Complexity
Report Issue
Finding the time and space complexity of a dynamic programming algorithm may sound like a daunting task. However, this task is usually not as difficult as it sounds. Furthermore, justifying the time and space complexity in an explanation is relatively simple as well. One of the main points with DP is that we never repeat calculations, whether by tabulation or memoization, we only compute a state once. Because of this, the time complexity of a DP algorithm is directly tied to the number of possible states.

If computing each state requires FF time, and there are nn possible states, then the time complexity of a DP algorithm is O(n \cdot F)O(n⋅F). With all the problems we have looked at so far, computing a state has just been using a recurrence relation equation, which is O(1)O(1). Therefore, the time complexity has just been equal to the number of states. To find the number of states, look at each of your state variables, compute the number of values each one can represent, and then multiply all these numbers together.

Let's say we had 3 state variables: \text{i}i, \text{k}k, and \text{holding}holding for some made up problem. \text{i}i is an integer used to keep track of an index for an input array \text{nums}nums, \text{k}k is an integer given in the input which represents the maximum actions we can do, and \text{holding}holding is a boolean variable. What will the time complexity be for a DP algorithm that solves this problem? Let \text{n = nums.length}n = nums.length and \text{K}K be the maximum actions possible given in the input. \text{i}i can be from \text{0}0 to \text{nums.length}nums.length, \text{k}k can be from \text{0}0 to \text{K}K, and \text{holding}holding }can be true or false. Therefore, there are \text{n} \cdot \text{K} \cdot \text{2}n⋅K⋅2 states. If computing each state is O(1)O(1), then the time complexity will be O(n \cdot K \cdot 2) = O(n \cdot K)O(n⋅K⋅2)=O(n⋅K).

Whenever we compute a state, we also store it so that we can refer to it in the future. In bottom-up, we tabulate the results, and in top-down, states are memoized. Since we store states, the space complexity is equal to the number of states. That means that in problems where calculating a state is O(1)O(1), the time and space complexity are the same. In many DP problems, there are optimizations that can improve both complexities - we'll talk about this later.

